In the next few videos we're going to
look at loops in Kotlin. Now we've
already seen the for loop but Kotlin has
other kinds of loops and in the next few
videos we're going to take a look at
these as well as revisiting the for loop
briefly. Now we're going to start off
with the while loop know the while
statement executes code continually as
long as some expression is true so in
other words while an expression is true
the loop will continue looping now when
the condition becomes false the loop
terminates, so looking at our example in
our demo class our main dot Katie we've
got one of the super vampire objects
just one down the bottom here Dracula
and you can see that I've run the
program to remind us what it's doing and
we can see that Dracula being created
with 140 hit points you can see that
down here in the output in three lives
and within inflicting twelve points of
damage but being a king vampire Dracula
only takes a quarter of that three
points of damage and he's also got three
lives now the players in this game will
have to find some pretty impressive
weapons to deal with this monster but
we're going to take him out using a
while loop now as I said a while loop
can be used to keep repeating a section
or block of code until some condition
becomes false so let's wrap the call to
take damage in a while loop and
repeatedly inflict damage on Dracula
until we same now the condition we want
to test is that Dracula isn't dead when
Dracula becomes dead
we can stop looping so what we want to
do is keep our loop repeating while
Dracula still has lives left
when Dracula's life's property reaches
zero we can stop so let's have a look at
that code so we're just going to come
down here after the print 'ln we're
going to put a wall in there while
Dracula dot lives is greater than zero
the left upper code block and we'll put
to take damage in that code block so in
other words how it becomes part of the
loop if we run this
you can see looking at the output it
took quite some time in other words
quite a lot of attacks before we get
Dracula's life's down to zero so while
statement starts off with the word while
as you can see on line 15 and then in
brackets there's a boolean expression
and what I mean by that is it has to
evaluate to true or false so while the
condition is true the code in the
brackets the parentheses will
continually be executed until either the
boolean expression becomes false and you
set that in the code perhaps or a break
is found in the code and I'm going to
show you an example of a break as well
so while it's very useful for doing
things like cycling or waiting for a
particular event to happen for example
while there's still data in a file
continue reading from that file it's
very useful to continually be checking
something until a particular condition
changes now in our example Dracula's
laughs are checked each time around the
loop if Dracula still has life left the
code inside the loop gets executed once
all the code is executed we only have
one code in here which you can see on
line 16 in our loop but there couldn't
be many more once all that code is
executed the codes checked again to see
if it's still true now
Dracula may have been a very powerful
enemy with three lives and 140 hit
points but the outcome wasn't in
question our wallet will keep going
around until Dracula's lives drop to
zero so the condition in our loop is
this so here in parentheses Dracula dot
lives greater than zero
well then evaluates to true we keep
looping and inflict more damage and you
can see so scroll up in the output the
first life lasted quite a while
basically as the hip points dropped from
140 by three each time now when the hip
points Dracula has a left would have
dropped below zero he loses a life
instead so the last two lives were lost
consequently very quickly the important
thing though is that the code kept
executing as long as Dracula still had
at least one life left
once the life became zero the condition
is no longer true and the while loop
terminates so that's a while loop as
long as the condition evaluates to true
all this code between these curly braces
in this case it's just a single line but
it could again be multiple lines all
that code between those curly braces
keeps executing when something happens
to make the condition evaluate to false
the while loop stops looping and
terminates now a code between the curly
braces is called a block so whenever I
talk about a code block or a block of
code I mean code inside curly braces so
looking at this entire main method you
can see that if I select all that to
code there between these starting and
closing curly braces he's also a block
of code so you can see that a block of
code or a code block can contain other
code blocks
okay so there's another way to get out
of a while loop and that's to break out
of it in fact you can break out of any
loop but we'll look at this first with
our while loop so to demonstrate break
we're going to give Dracula another
method or more accurately we're going to
give the vampire king class another
method now you don't get to live as long
as Dracula without having a good sense
of self-preservation so we're going to
give our vampire Kings a run away method
so let's start off we go to our vampire
king we're going to write this function
in a naive way and then we going to
change it to more Kotlin like code so
come down here below the take damage for
vampire king and we're going to create
this function function runaway
parenthesis colon billion if the write
curly braces we're going to put if
parentheses lives is less than to return
true and have an else outside of the
code block and create another code block
with it after the else return false so
it's a very simple method that returns
true if the number of life's drops below
two in false otherwise now as I
mentioned I've written that code in
quite a long way in fact Android studio
they come over here there's actually
complaining a little bit to remove the
redundant if statement so what we can do
is use that light bulb to convert this
into her warm all right idiomatic form
so we could do click on that and that
does exactly the same thing but in a
less verbose way so if life is less than
- it'll return true otherwise it returns
false which does exactly the same thing
so the condition lives lesson two
evaluates to true or false so we can
just return the result of evaluating the
expression instead of having to
explicitly test it now if you prefer to
write code like this longhand until you
get the hang of it that's that first
example before we just converted it to
this more iam edit format that's fine
but be aware that a lot of code you read
will do it this shorter way so I've
shown on line 15.
Okay so Dracula now runs away if he
loses too many lives so let's test that
in our wallet then we go back to main so
still go our world Dracula's life is
greater than zero and what we're going
to do here before the take damage we're
going to put if then print the Seas
Dracula dot run away and then add print
add a code block so print line' luckily
right away
we'll put else then we'll wrap the take
damage in another code block as well
like so so let's just try running this
and confirm that it works
now notice that tell what's happening
here the Dracula runs away when his
life's drops below two but once he's run
away the condition can never become true
because we can't inflict any more damage
I'm gonna stop the program at this point
by clicking on this red square in the
top left-hand corner so you can see that
the loop is got out of control it's just
looping around and around forever so
I'll scroll up a bit it's a little quite
a bit actually because we let it run for
quite a while right up towards the top
in fact it's actually cleared out they
run buffer so we cannot see anything
above that basically it's going around
hundreds of times while I was talking
here so this is called an infinite loop
and our program was stuck in it now
because there was no way for the
condition to become a false it just kept
on looping so what we want to do is
somehow break out of the loop when
Dracula runs away so we can do that with
a break statement so after the code that
says oh they actually print out the fact
that Dracula ran away we're going to add
a break there so then a break will that
next line and now if we run this again
we should finally no longer get an
infinite loop and you can see what
happened was lost alive lost to life and
at that point loss was less than two so
directly run away and the program Neal
exits because we've added this break
statement on line 18 so basically Kotlin
jumped out of the loop at that point and
prevented us from getting stuck going
round and round forever so you can see
that breaks very useful when you need to
terminate a loop without waiting for the
condition to become false now that can
happen for all sorts of reasons I
mentioned using a while loop to keep
reading from a file as long as as data
available as an example now if we were
we were searching for something in the
file you wouldn't want to keep reading
the data after finding it so in that
case you could use break to terminate
the loop instead of having to read
through to the end of the file now we'll
be seeing break views often in the
course so you'll see plenty of examples
I'm in rule use there's something else
you can do in a loop and that's to
continue so basically any time you
execute a continue statement the code
goes back to the top of the loop without
executing any more of the code in the
loop so continuously used as often as
break but it can be useful in some
situations to see how he could use
continue let's give Dracula the ability
to dodge some blow
you know game such as this a normally
played using dice so we need to
introduce a bit of chance into the game
so I'm going to use another Java class
called random which we use to give
Dracula a chance to dodge a blow so what
we're going to do is add a dodges
function to the vampire king class and
that's going to return true if the King
vampire dodges successfully and false
otherwise so go back to vampire king
below the runaway function and a
definition for dodges function Dodgers
parentheses colon boolean lip to write
curly braces then we're going to type
Val red equals random with a capital our
in parentheses then Val chance equals R
and dot next int and 3 in parentheses
then we're going to put see what we'll
do this will make that a six dollar
three we'll talk about this shortly now
the next line if parentheses chance is
ground three we're going to print an
output the fact that Dracula dodges and
print Lynn Dracula dodges return true
otherwise outside of the if code block
we're going to return false
okay so there's that Dodge is that
function and what should have happened
when you type random Android shittier
should have automatically imported the
Java dot util package and that's where
the random class is define if for some
reason it hasn't you can see in my case
if it has import Java dot util dot star
before getting an error there just type
that in a line one and that will look at
that - error to disappear all right so
this random class has a next int method
that is being used here on line 22 and
that returns a number between 0 and 5 so
it's like a six-sided dice but labelled
starting in zero rather than 1 then we
can specify the range by passing an INT
argument to next int so if we wanted to
emulate a 20-sided die for example we'd
pass 20s the argument remember that
computer's account the 0 as a number so
we'd actually get a value from 0 to 19
in that scenario we returned instead and
here we're using 6 as the argument
we're gonna get a value returned between
zero to five and consequently with the F
code we're doing any chance is greater
than 3 so the vampire king has got a one
in three chance of dodging a blow so go
back to our main class we can now modify
the while loop to check if Dracula
dodges they just below the well directly
they've got lives greater than 0 the
first line before they Dracula not run
away we can put if in parentheses
Dracula dot dodges then a code like
we're going to type continue and leave
it like that and leave the other
courtesies so now if Dracula dodges the
continue statement should get executed
and that's if it caused the rest of the
loops block to be skipped and the code
goes back to the while statement and
tests the condition again I'm going to
run the program and keep in mind this is
now a bit random so we'll get different
results each time we run the program we
should be able to see Dracula dodging
some of the blows you can see some
dodges there as well as taking damage
you can see that you've got two dodges
here but if I run this again the results
will be entirely random
you can see we've got different Airport
each time so that's a quick overview of
the while loop they're great when you
want to keep repeating a block of code
as long as the condition remains true
once the condition becomes false the
loop terminates now we can also break
out of the loop as we saw as well as
skipping back to the beginning without
executing the rest of the code in the
loop by using a using a continue
statement and I've also shown you the
random class now you could modify the
program so that instead of giving you're
always giving Dracula 20 points of
damage you get a new random number each
time you called a random dot next int
method so you could emulate a 20-sided
die so make the program work a bit more
like Dungeons & Dragons. Alright so in
the next video we're gonna have a look
at the for loop. See you in the next video.